---
date: 2023-01-20T00:00:00+00:00
slug: announcing-linkerd-day-2023
title: Announcing Linkerd Day 2023 at Kubecon EU!
keywords: [linkerd]
params:
  author: catherine
  showCover: true
---

Today we're thrilled to announce the first-ever [Linkerd
Day](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/cncf-hosted-co-located-events/linkerd-day/)!
Linkerd Day will be held as a day zero conference at Kubecon EU in Amsterdam
this April. Interested in speaking or sponsoring? Read on for details—but don't
delay, things are moving fast!

Linkerd Day comes at a fantastic time for Linkerd. In 2021, Linkerd became the
first and only service mesh to achieve CNCF graduation status. Last year alone,
[Linkerd adoption
doubled](https://linkerd.io/2022/12/28/service-mesh-2022-recap-ebpf-gateway-api/),
despite being one of the most mature projects in the CNCF. Organizations all
around the world, from retailers like
[Walmart](https://siliconangle.com/2023/01/17/walmarts-supercloud-cloud-native-kubernetes-based-platform-supercloud2/)
to next-generation video game platforms like [XBox
Cloud](https://buoyant.io/case-studies/xbox) to academic institutions like [Penn
State](https://buoyant.io/case-studies/penn-state) to next-generation banks like
[Lunar Bank](https://buoyant.io/case-studies/lunar) all rely on Linkerd to power
their critical production architectures.

Project momentum has never been stronger, and the Linkerd maintainers are
incredibly excited to host everyone in Amsterdam.

![Linkerd Day logo](linkerd-day-dark-2x.png)

## Using Linkerd? Submit a talk!

There are many ways to contribute to open source, and sharing your journey and
lessons learned is one of the best of them. If you're running Linkerd, please
[submit a
talk](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/cncf-hosted-co-located-events/cfp-colocated-events/)!
The CFP closes on February 12, so time is short.

Need help coming up with the perfect pitch? Never fear, our [Linkerd Community
Anchor](https://linkerd.io/community/anchor/) program is here. Please reach out
and we'll give you hands-on help crafting the perfect submission.

## Interested in sponsoring? Act fast!

The Linkerd audience is like no other. This select group of world-class
engineers have cut through the hype and noise in the cloud native space and
picked the world's fastest, lightest service mesh as part of their Kubernetes
platform. They're hungry to learn and hungry to build.

You can support the Linkerd community by sponsoring Linkerd Day. Details are on
page 22 of the [KubeCon sponsorship
brochure](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/sponsor-cncf-2023-011723.pdf),
and please feel free to reach out to the CNCF directly or to email me (my first
name at buoyant.io) with any questions.

## Not going to Amsterdam? Meet us at the Service Mesh Academy!

If you can't make it to Kubecon EU this year, there are plenty of Linkerd
learning opportunities at [our Service Mesh
Academy](https://buoyant.io/service-mesh-academy). We host monthly live,
expert-led workshops that provide hands-on training on Linkerd and related CNCF
projects. From setting up mTLS, to securing multi-cluster communication, to
fine-grained network policy, you'll learn everything you need for successfully
running a service mesh in production.

Check out the upcoming workshops and [register
here](https://buoyant.io/service-mesh-academy).

## Let's do this!

Whether you're attending, speaking, or sponsoring, we look forward to seeing you
at the very first Linkerd Day. We promise this will be an event jam-packed with
insightful talks, great sponsors, and plenty of opportunities to meet Linkerd
maintainers and ask them all your burning Linkerd-related questions.

See you there!

**Note**: As of this year, all Kubecon day zero / colocated events share a
ticket—if you attend Linkerd Day, you can also attend all the other colocated
events. That's great news for attendees!

## Linkerd is for everyone

Linkerd is a [graduated project](/2021/07/28/announcing-cncf-graduation/) of the
[Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://cncf.io/). Linkerd is [committed to
open
governance.](https://linkerd.io/2019/10/03/linkerds-commitment-to-open-governance/)
If you have feature requests, questions, or comments, we'd love to have you join
our rapidly-growing community! Linkerd is hosted on
[GitHub](https://github.com/linkerd/), and we have a thriving community on
[Slack](https://slack.linkerd.io/), [Twitter](https://twitter.com/linkerd), and
the [mailing lists](https://linkerd.io/2/get-involved/). Come and join the fun!

(*Photo by [@as_w](https://twitter.com/as_w) on Twitter*)
