---
title: "The service mesh in 2022: What's next for Linkerd?"
author: 'william'
date: 2021-12-29T00:00:00+00:00
thumbnail: /uploads/xan-white-XxHT8cKFYKo-unsplash.jpg
featured: false
slug: the-service-mesh-in-2022
tags: [Linkerd]
---

![A straight road ahead with mountains off to the
distance](/uploads/xan-white-XxHT8cKFYKo-unsplash.jpg)

By all accounts, 2021 has been a banner year for Linkerd. The project [achieved
graduated status in the Cloud Native Computing
Foundation](https://linkerd.io/2021/07/28/announcing-cncf-graduation/), the
highest possible level of project maturity. It introduced major features such as
[authorization policy](https://linkerd.io/2021/09/30/announcing-linkerd-2.11/)
and [extensions](https://linkerd.io/2021/03/11/announcing-linkerd-2.10/). The
Linkerd team [keynoted at Kubecon
EU](https://buoyant.io/media/linkerd-vs-covid-19/) on the many ways Linkerd is
used to combat COVID-19; it published [multiple benchmarks showing an
order-of-magnitude performance and resource usage lead over
Istio](https://www.cncf.io/blog/2021/12/17/benchmarking-linkerd-and-istio-2021-redux/);
and it continued to [lead the charge on bringing
Rust](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BWL4889RKhU) in the cloud native space.
Linkerd's adoption has skyrocketed this year, with organizations as wide-ranging
as [Microsoft](https://www.microsoft.com/), [S&P
Global](https://www.spglobal.com/en/), and  [Norwegian Labour and Welfare
Administration](https://www.nav.no/), along with many others, all publicly
adopting Linkerd.

Most importantly, in 2021 Linkerd helped thousands of organizations around the
world adopt a modern, zero-trust approach to securing their Kubernetes clusters
by providing crucial features such as zero-config mutual TLS and identity-based
authorization. Not too shabby for a project that just a few years ago was still
trying to explain to the world exactly [what a service mesh
is](https://buoyant.io/service-mesh-manifesto/)!

Of course, we're not the type of project to rest on our laurels. We've been
planning a very exciting roadmap for next year—read on for a sneak peek of
what's on the docket for Linkerd next year.

## Client-side policy

In 2022 we'll be working on adding something very important to Linkerd:
_client-side policy_, or the ability to control traffic that's allowed out of
meshed pods. Client-side policy covers a vast set of features, including:

* **Header-based routing**: the ability to route traffic based on the headers of
  a request. This unlocks a set of advanced functionality, especially when it
  comes to routing within a set of services.
* **Circuit breaking**: the ability to automatically shut off requests to an
  overloaded service. While Linkerd's sophisticated load balancing combined with
  plus Kubernetes's existing health check mechanisms already provide a basic
  form of circuit breaking, there are some good reasons for wanting to provide
  more explicit configuration.
* **Egress control**: the ability to prevent types of traffic from exiting the
  cluster. While this is currently possible with things like egress gateways,
  this is a natural feature for client-side policy to encompass, as the data
  plane proxies can enforce these policies directly.
* ... and lots more.

Linkerd actually already has a basic form of client-side policy in the form of
[ServiceProfiles](https://linkerd.io/2/reference/service-profiles/), which allow
you (among other things) to control the retry behavior of callers to a service.
In 2.12 and beyond, we'll be revisiting ServiceProfiles and tackling this
important class of features in a more systematic way.

## Multi-cluster failover

We've seen a clear uptick in interest from Linkerd users in the ability to
automatically route traffic across clusters in the presence of a failure. For
users with multiple clusters spread across regions or clouds, this ability is
critical for availability goals, disaster recovery, and more.

Linkerd already provides the basic building blocks for doing this, and we'll
build mechanisms on top of these building blocks for doing automated,
cross-cluster, per-service failover in a way that's safe and sane.

## Fine-grained authorization policy

In Linkerd 2.11, we [introduced _server-side_
policy](https://linkerd.io/2021/09/30/announcing-linkerd-2.11/), which gives you
control over the traffic allowed into (as opposed to out of) meshed pods.
Server-side policy added some important features to Linkerd such as
authorization policy, which restricts pod-to-pod connections based on features
such as workload identity.

We'll be extending this model to cover not just workload identity but also
things like gRPC methods and HTTP verbs and routes, so that policies such as
"only allow GET requests to the `/metrics` endpoint over mTLS'd connections from
clients in the `Foo` namespace" are possible.

## Mesh expansion and SPIFFE support

In 2022 we'll be working on making Linkerd's data plane work outside of
Kubernetes. This means that Linkerd users will be able to mesh services that
live outside of Kubernetes and get the same reliability, observability, and
security guarantees they get for Kubernetes services today.

You can already run Linkerd's ultralight, ultra-fast Rust proxy outside of
Kubernetes today. However, in order to extend Linkerd's operational
guarantees—especially around security—to non-Kubernetes environments, we need to
generalize some existing Linkerd features, notably the way it provisions
workload identity. We're looking at the [SPIFFE standard](https://spiffe.io/)
as a way to do this in a non-Kubernetes-specific way.

## End-of-life for Linkerd 1.x

In 2022 we will officially end-of-life Linkerd 1.x. The 1.x branch has been in
maintenance mode for quite some time, and with the recent explosion of adoption
for Linkerd, our efforts now need to be solely focused on Linkerd 2.x.

## What about WebAssembly?

We're keeping a close eye on WebAssembly (Wasm). As a generic mechanism for
feature delivery, it doesn't really make sense for Linkerd: Wasm imposes a
significant runtime performance penalty, and for specific features it's better
to simply implement them in the proxy directly. (One of the many advantages of
developing our own proxy is that we can simple do this, without fanfare and
without needing to navigate competing goals between projects.) However, as a
mechanism for enabling end-user plugins, Wasm may very well make sense for
Linkerd, and it's in that light that we are evaluating it.

## What about eBPF?

We're keeping a close eye on eBPF. As a technology for making network code
faster, we're all for it, and in that sense [you can use Linkerd and eBPF
together
today](https://buoyant.io/2020/12/23/kubernetes-network-policies-with-cilium-and-linkerd/).
As a codename for "replacing sidecars with a per-node Envoy instance" or
"replacing sidecars by putting all the logic in the kernel" we're unconvinced.
We became very familiar with the per-node model in Linkerd 1.x, and we
[explicitly moved away from it when designing Linkerd
2.x](https://www.infoq.com/articles/linkerd-v2-production-adoption/). The move
to sidecar (per-pod) proxies in 2.x was motivated by a variety of issues we saw
with Linkerd 1.x, including messy failure domains, poor separation of security
concerns, and [the confused deputy
problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confused_deputy_problem).

Of course, performance and resource consumption are critical for service
meshes—we've regularly published [competitive service mesh
benchmarks](https://linkerd.io/2021/11/29/linkerd-vs-istio-benchmarks-2021/) and
are proud of where Linkerd stands. But, to paraphrase Louis Ryan (!), eking out
the last bit of performance is far less important than having good units of
maintenance and isolation. We learned that lesson the hard way with Linkerd 1.x.

Whether user space or kernel space, we haven't yet seen anything that challenges
our belief that the sidecar model makes life fundamentally easier for the
_humans_ who interact with and operate the service mesh.

## 2022 is going to be another great year for Linkerd

Needless to say, there's a lot more exciting and interesting work we're planning
on that didn't make it to this list. If any of the above sounds exciting or
interesting—we'd love your help. If you've got feature request, or think we got
something totally wrong in our analysis above—let us know. And if you just want
to sit back and let the features roll in, that's fine too! After all, Linkerd is
for everyone.

## Linkerd is for everyone

Linkerd is a [graduated project](/2021/07/28/announcing-cncf-graduation/) of the
[Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://cncf.io/). Linkerd is [committed to
open
governance.](https://linkerd.io/2019/10/03/linkerds-commitment-to-open-governance/)
If you have feature requests, questions, or comments, we'd love to have you join
our rapidly-growing community! Linkerd is hosted on
[GitHub](https://github.com/linkerd/), and we have a thriving community on
[Slack](https://slack.linkerd.io/), [Twitter](https://twitter.com/linkerd), and
the [mailing lists](https://linkerd.io/2/get-involved/). Come and join the fun!

(*Photo by [Xan
White](https://unsplash.com/@xwpics?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText).*)
